{\rtf1\ansi \deff9\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f1\froman\fcharset2\fprq2 Symbol;}{\f3\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1 Courier;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 MS Sans Serif;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Helvetica;}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;
\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\nowidctlpar \f9\fs21 \snext0 Normal;}{\s1\sb240\nowidctlpar \b\f9\ul \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 1;}{\s3\li360\nowidctlpar 
\b\f9 \sbasedon0\snext17 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\cs15 \additive\f9\fs16\up6\lang1033 \sbasedon10 footnote reference;}{\s16\nowidctlpar \f9\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext16 footnote text;}{\s17\li720\nowidctlpar \f9\fs21 
\sbasedon0\snext17 Normal Indent;}{\*\cs18 \additive\super \sbasedon10 endnote reference;}{\s19\nowidctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640 \f9\fs21 \sbasedon0\snext19 header;}{\s20\nowidctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640 \f9\fs21 \sbasedon0\snext20 footer;}{
\s21\sa120\nowidctlpar \f9\fs21 \sbasedon0\snext21 Body Text;}{\s22\fi-360\li720\nowidctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvl11\pnf1\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\f9\fs21 \sbasedon0\snext22 List Bullet 2;}{\s23\li360\sa120\nowidctlpar \f9\fs21 
\sbasedon0\snext23 Body Text Indent;}{\s24\li360\sa120\nowidctlpar \f9\fs21 \sbasedon23\snext24 Body Text 3;}{\*\cs25 \additive\b\f3 \sbasedon10 TT;}}{\info{\author John Walker}{\operator John Walker}{\creatim\yr1992\mo11\dy10\hr18\min52}
{\revtim\yr1999\mo3\dy16\hr17\min54}{\printim\yr1993\mo2\dy15\hr18\min13}{\version3}{\edmins4}{\nofpages8}{\nofwords1311}{\nofchars7475}{\*\company  }{\vern57431}}\paperw11909\paperh16834 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphhotz425\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex0 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \qc\widctlpar \f9\fs21 {\cs15\b\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\nowidctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} Contents}}{\b  }{\cs15\b\fs16\up6 $
{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\nowidctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Contents}}{\b  }{\cs15\b\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\nowidctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 +} mt:0}}{\b\f7\fs48  Moontool Help}{\f7\fs20 
\par }\pard \widctlpar {\f7\fs20\uldb 
\par Moontool Display Details}{\v\f7\fs20 Details}{\f7\fs20 
\par }{\f7\fs20\uldb Setting Universal time}{\v\f7\fs20 Setutime}{\f7\fs20 
\par }{\f7\fs20\uldb Setting Julian date}{\v\f7\fs20 Setjdate}{\f7\fs20 
\par }{\f7\fs20\uldb Moontool in the System Tray}{\v\f7\fs20 Tray}{\f7\fs20 
\par }{\f7\fs20\uldb Clipboard support}{\v\f7\fs20 Clipboard}{\f7\fs20 
\par }{\f7\fs20\uldb References for astronomical programming}{\v\f7\fs20 References}{\f7\fs20 
\par }\pard \keepn\widctlpar {\f7\fs20 \page }{\cs15\f7\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} Details}${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Moontool Display Details}K{\footnote \pard\plain 
\s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 K} Moontool Display Details}}{\cs15\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\nowidctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 +} mt:1}}{\f7  }{\f7\fs36 Moontool Display Details
\par }\pard \qc\widctlpar {\f7\fs20 \{bmc helpmt.bmp\}}{\f7 
\par }\pard \widctlpar {\f7 
\par }{\f7\fs20 Items displayed in the Moontool display are as follows:
\par }\pard \widctlpar\tx1440 {\f7\fs20 
\par }\pard \fi-2160\li2160\widctlpar\tx2160 {\b\f7\fs20 Julian date}{\f7\fs20 \tab 
This is the current Julian date with the time represented as a fraction of a day.  Be careful, when interpreting the day fraction, to recall that Julian dates start noon, not midnight. 
\par }\pard \fi-2160\li2160\widctlpar {\b\f7\fs20 Universal time}{\f7\fs20 \tab This field specifies the current Coordinated Universal Time (UCT), also known as Greenwich Mean Time (GMT).  This is the time at th
e Prime Meridian, not adjusted for Daylight (Summer) time.  This time is computed from the local time supplied by your computer's clock by applying a time zone correction.  Every other number in Moontool is calculated based on this Universal time, so if i
t's incorrect, you'll have to adjust the time zone setting (in the Control Panel's Date/Time item) to agree with your location.
\par }\pard \fi-2160\li2160\widctlpar\tx2160 {\b\f7\fs20 Local time}{\f7\fs20 \tab The current local time and date supplied by your computer's clock.
\par }{\b\f7\fs20 Age of Moon}{\f7\fs20 \tab The time, expressed as days, hours, and minutes, since the last New Moon.
\par }{\b\f7\fs20 Moon phase}{\f7\fs20 \tab Moon's phase (percent of the lunar disc illuminated, as seen from Earth).
\par }{\b\f7\fs20 Moon's distance}{\f7\fs20 \tab Distance of the centre of the Moon from the centre of the Earth, given both in kilometres and Earth radii (approximately 6378.14 kilometres, neglecting equatorial flattening of the globe).
\par }{\b\f7\fs20 Moon subtends}{\f7\fs20 \tab Angle subtended by the Moon in the sky.  A solar eclipse will be total if the angle subtended by the Moon equals or exceeds that subtended by the Sun; otherwise the eclipse will be annular.
\par }{\b\f7\fs20 Sun's distance}{\f7\fs20 \tab The distance of the Earth from the Sun in kilometres and mean astronomical units (149,597,870 km).
\par }{\b\f7\fs20 Sun subtends}{\f7\fs20 \tab Angle subtended by the Sun in the sky.  A solar eclipse will be total if the angle subtended by the Sun is less than that subtended by the Moon; otherwise the eclipse will be annular.
\par }\pard \fi-2160\li2160\widctlpar {\b\f7\fs20 Last new moon
\par First quarter
\par Full moon
\par Last quarter
\par }\pard \fi-2160\li2160\widctlpar\tx2160 {\b\f7\fs20 Next new moon}{\f7\fs20 \tab Time and date of phases of the current lunation.  These times are accurate to about two minutes.
\par }{\b\f7\fs20 Lunation}{\f7\fs20 \tab Number of the current and next lunation (interval between New Moons) in E. W. Brown's numbered series of lunations starting on 1923 January 16.
\par }\pard \keepn\widctlpar {\b\f7\fs28 \page }{\cs15\f7\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} Setutime}${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Set Universal time}K{\footnote \pard\plain 
\s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 K} universal time, setting}K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 K} time, universal, setting}K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 K} Revere, Paul}K{\footnote 
\pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 K} Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth}K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 K} historical research}K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 K}
 Sky & Telescope magazine}K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 K} calendar, Julian}K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 K} Julian calendar}K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {
\cs15\fs16\up6 K} calendar, Gregorian}K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 K} Gregorian calendar}}{\cs15\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\nowidctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 +} mt:2}}{\f7  }{\f7\fs36 Set Universal time

\par }\pard \qc\widctlpar {\f7\fs20 \{bmc helput.bmp\}}{\f7 
\par }\pard \widctlpar {\f7\fs20 
\par This dialogue allows you to enter an arbitrary Universal (Greenwich Mean) date and time and see the Julian date corresponding to that moment.  The Julian date is updated dynamically as you change the Universal time.  Click OK to have Moontool display the 
situation at the specified Universal time (doing this will halt automatic updates; select Options/Run to resume them).  Clicking Now resets the Universal time to the current date and time. 
\par 
\par Moontool's ability to display the Moon's phase at any moment in history lets you quickly answer questions such as that posed in the April 1992 issue of }{\i\f7\fs20 Sky & Telescope}{\f7\fs20 
 (page 437): did Paul Revere's midnight ride really occur under the full Moon, or did Longfellow add the Moon to his poem purely for atmosphere?  Entering the time and date of Revere's ride: 05:00:00 UTC April 19th, 1775, in the Set Universal time panel, 
we find the Moon was 87% full that night, waning from the last full Moon at 21:53 UTC on April 15th, 1775.  Moontool tells us that the Moon was indeed close to full that night, confirming Revere's own recollection that "the Moon shone bright".
\par 
\par If you use this dialogue as a "Julian date calculator", be sure to remember that Julian dates change at noon Greenwich time rather than midnight.
\par 
\par You can enter dates as far back as Julian day 0, January 1, -4712 and as far into the future as you wish.  Note that astronomers and historians use different conventions for years before 1 }{\scaps\f7\fs20 a.d.}{\f7\fs20 
  In history books, the year that preceded 1 }{\scaps\f7\fs20 a.d.}{\f7\fs20  is called 1 }{\scaps\f7\fs20 b.c.}{\f7\fs20 ; zero not having come into use in European culture at the time.  Astronomers consider the year before 1 }{\scaps\f7\fs20 a.d.}{
\f7\fs20  as "year 0".  Thus when an astronomer talks about an eclipse having occurred in the year -412, that's the year historians refer to as "413 }{\scaps\f7\fs20 b.c.}{\f7\fs20 
".  In converting historical dates to Julian days, Moontool assumes the canonical date for the adoption of the Gregorian calendar, Friday, October 15th, 1582.  Many countries shifted to the Gregorian calendar much later; in Great Britain, not until 1752. 
 When investigating events in history, make sure you express all dates after October 15th, 1582 in the }{\i\f7\fs20 Gregorian}{\f7\fs20  calendar.
\par 
\par To convert a Julian date to Universal time, use the }{\f7\fs20\uldb Options/Set Julian date}{\v\f7\fs20 Setjdate}{\f7\fs20  dialogue.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\sb240\keepn\widctlpar \b\f9\ul {\b0\f7\fs28 \page }{\cs15\b0\f7\fs16\ulnone\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} Setjdate}${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Set Julian date
}K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 K} Julian date, setting}K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 K} date, Julian, setting}K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 K}
 calendar, Julian}K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 K} Julian calendar}K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 K} calendar, Gregorian}K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 K}
 Gregorian calendar}}{\cs15\b0\fs16\ulnone\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\nowidctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 +} mt:3}}{\b0\f7\ulnone  }{\b0\f7\fs36\ulnone Set Julian date
\par }\pard\plain \qc\widctlpar \f9\fs21 {\f7\fs20 \{bmc helpjd.bmp\}
\par }\pard \widctlpar {\f7\fs20 
\par This dialogue allows you to enter a Julian date (remember that the day number changes at noon, not midnight) and see the corresponding Universal time displayed.  The Universal time is updated dynamically as you change the Julian date.  Click OK to have Mo
ontool display the situation at the specified Julian date (doing this will halt automatic updates; use Options/Run to resume them).  Clicking Now resets the Julian date to the current date and time. 
\par 
\par You can enter any Julian date zero or greater.  For Julian dates for years before 1 }{\scaps\f7\fs20 a.d.}{\f7\fs20 , note that astronomers and historians use different conventions those years.  In history books, the year that preceded 1 }{\scaps\f7\fs20 
a.d.}{\f7\fs20  is called 1 }{\scaps\f7\fs20 b.c.}{\f7\fs20 ; zero not having come into use in European culture at the time.  Astronomers consider the year before 1 }{\scaps\f7\fs20 a.d.}{\f7\fs20 
 as "year 0".  Thus when an astronomer talks about an eclipse having occurred in the year -412, that's the year historians refer to as "413 }{\scaps\f7\fs20 b.c.}{\f7\fs20 
".  In converting Julian days to historical dates, Moontool assumes the canonical da
te for the adoption of the Gregorian calendar, Friday, October 15th, 1582.  Many countries shifted to the Gregorian calendar much later; in Great Britain, not until 1752.  When investigating events in history, make sure you express all dates after October
 15th, 1582 in the }{\i\f7\fs20 Gregorian}{\f7\fs20  calendar.
\par 
\par To convert a Universal time to Julian date, use the }{\f7\fs20\uldb Options/Set Universal time}{\v\f7\fs20 Setutime}{\f7\fs20  dialogue.
\par }{\f7 \page }{\cs15\b\f7\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} Clipboard}${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Clipboard support}K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {
\cs15\fs16\up6 K} system tray}}{\cs15\b\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\nowidctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 +} mt:4}}{\b\f7  }{\f7\fs36 Moontool in the System Tray
\par }{\f7\fs20 
\par When minimised, Moontool places 
itself in the "System Tray" (the area at the right of the bozo bar where all the other cryptic icons hide out) rather than as a button on the task bar.  The icon shows, to the extent possible for such a small image, the current phase of the Moon.  Double 
clicking it restores the normal Moontool display.  Right clicking the tray icon displays a pop-up menu permitting you to open Moontool or exit the program immediately.
\par 
\par If you'd like Moontool to automatically appear in the system tray, place  a shortcut to it in your StartUp folder with the "Run" item set to "Minimized".  Then, every time Windows reboots, Moontool will be launched and add itself to the system tray.

\par }{\f7 
\par \page }{\cs15\b\f7\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} Tray}${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Moontool in the System Tray}K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {
\cs15\fs16\up6 K} clipboard}}{\cs15\b\fs16\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\nowidctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 +} mt:5}}{\b\f7  }{\f7\fs36 Clipboard support
\par }{\f7\fs20 
\par You can copy the current image displayed in the Moontool window to the clipboard with the Edit/Copy menu item.
\par }{\f7 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\sb240\keepn\widctlpar \b\f9\ul {\f7 \page }{\cs15\b0\f7\fs16\ulnone\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} References}${\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $}
 References for astronomical programming}K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 K} reference books}K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 K} books, reference} K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar 
\f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 K} Duffett-Smith, Peter}K{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\widctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 K} Meeus, Jean}}{\cs15\b0\fs16\ulnone\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\nowidctlpar \f9\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 +} mt:6}}{\b0\f7\ulnone  }{
\b0\f7\fs36\ulnone References for Astronomical Programming
\par }\pard\plain \widctlpar \f9\fs21 {\f7 
\par }{\f7\fs20 The algorithms used in Moontool may be found in the following books.  If you're interested in developing software for astronomy, these books are highly recommended.  In addition, }{\i\f7\fs20 Sky & Telescope}{\f7\fs20  magazine has a monthly }{
\i\f7\fs20 Astronomical Computing}{\f7\fs20  column which publishes algorithms and discusses their applications. 
\par 
\par }\pard \fi-630\li720\widctlpar {\f7\fs20 Meeus, Jean.  }{\i\f7\fs20 Astronomical Algorithms}{\f7\fs20 
.  Richmond: Willmann-Bell, 1991.  A must-have; if you only buy one book, make sure it's this one.  Algorithms are presented mathematically, not as computer programs, but source code implementing many of the algorithms in the book can be ordered separatel
y from the publisher in either QuickBasic, Turbo Pascal, or C.  Meeus provides many worked examples of calculations which are essential to debugging your code, and frequently presents several algorithms with different tradeoffs among accuracy, speed, comp
lexity, and long-term (century and millennia) validity.
\par 
\par Duffett-Smith, Peter.  }{\i\f7\fs20 Practical Astronomy With Your Calculator.  3rd ed.  }{\f7\fs20  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981.  Despite the word }{\i\f7\fs20 Calculator}{\f7\fs20 
 in the title; this is a valuable reference if you're interested in developing software which calculates planetary positions, orbits, eclipses, and the like.  More background information is given than in Meeus, which helps those not already versed in astr
onomy learn the often-confusing terminology.  The algorithms given are simpler and less accurate than those provided by Meeus, but are suitable for most practical work.
\par }\pard \widctlpar {\f7\fs20 
\par These and many other standard references for mathematical and positional astronomy can be obtained from:
\par 
\par }\pard \li720\widctlpar {\f7\fs20 Willmann-Bell, Inc.
\par P.O.  Box 35025
\par Richmond, VA  23235
\par USA
\par Phone:\tab ++1 (804) 320-7016
\par Fax:\tab ++1 (804) 272-5920.
\par 
\par }\pard \widctlpar {\f7\fs20 Another excellent source of material relating to all aspects of astronomy, including computer-related materials such as astronomical databases is the bookselling arm of }{\i\f7\fs20 Sky & Telescope}{\f7\fs20  magazine:
\par 
\par }\pard \li720\widctlpar {\f7\fs20 Sky Publishing Corp.
\par P.O. Box 9111
\par Belmont, MA  02178-9111
\par USA
\par Phone:\tab ++1 (800) 253-0245
\par \tab ++1 (617) 864-7360
\par Fax:\tab ++1 (617) 864-6117.
\par }\pard \widctlpar {\f7 \page 
\par }}